-Even as the shutdown drags on,
we have not seen Mitch McConnell
really play a leading role
in the negotiations to try
to resolve this thing
and, really, this is a very
unfamiliar spot for McConnell.
Here is a guy who has a history
of trying to make deals.
-Political stunts are not
gonna get us anywhere.
-Here's somebody who is a sort
of savvy political strategist.
-In previous
government shutdowns,
the Senate's done business.
-And, yet, by choice,
he has removed himself
from these negotiations.
And we can see a couple
of reasons
for why he has done that.
If you go back to December,
he thought that he had a deal
to defer a government shutdown.
He moved forward with a vote
that would fund
the government temporarily
and he got
the unanimous support.
-Let's pass it.
Let's finish our work
for this year.
Let's secure our country.
-But then what happened?
The president himself said,
"Oh, you know what?
I'm not going to sign this".
And so, looking at that,
McConnell observed
the situation and said,
"Look, this now has to be a deal
between Nancy Pelosi,
the House speaker;
Chuck Schumer,
the Democratic Senate leader;
and the president and,
until they can come to a deal,
I'm not gonna play
a role in this.
No further votes will occur
until the president
and Senate Democrats
have reached an agreement
to resolve this.
-He's somebody who never says
anything by accident.
Everything he says and does
is usually pretty calculated
and, right now,
his position is pretty firm
and it's been the same
for the past few weeks.
But Democrats say,
"Look, you need to use
your clout, use your power.
You're the majority leader.
If you were to just hold a vote
on these bills,
maybe that would pressure
the president to do something".
But, right now, I think what
he's trying to do is show
that he is
on the side of President Trump.
Every time Nancy Pelosi
does something or says
something
that's antagonistic to Trump,
whether it's about the State
of the Union or something else,
he wants to show that
he's aligned with Trump.
-These days, it seems
like Democrats
are happy to take their cues
from the gentlelady from San
Francisco and her extreme,
fringe position that walls
have now become amoral?
Really?
-But, when you look forward,
there's a reason why McConnell
needs to work with Trump
and why he needs a lot
of his fellow
Republican senators
to work with Trump.
McConnell's up for reelection
in 2020.
He's up in a state
that's very conservative,
a state that supported
Trump very,
very strongly in 2016
and is expected to do
so in 2020.
And so, if you're McConnell
and you stray too far from
Trump, you could draw
a primary challenger.
You could draw somebody who,
you know, runs against you
and says you're not
a strong enough
supporter for the president.
That can be very dangerous.
And, when McConnell looks at his
Republican colleagues,
you know, a number of them
are up for reelection in 2020
and he knows the same thing
could happen to them.
For McConnell, you know,
it's clear
that he politically
can't really afford
to distance himself
too much from Trump
because that can get
really dangerous for him
as he tries to win
another term in the Senate.
And, you know, when you talk to
a lot of Republicans,
they look at the situation
and they say,
"Well, he doesn't really have
a choice, at this point.
It's a tough situation for him
to be in".
Essentially, what McConnell
has done
is he's put his own future
and the future
of the other 52 Republicans
in the hands of Donald Trump,
who has been
an unpredictable president.
So, it's a little bit of a risk
for McConnell right now,
that he's taking,
as he sort of steps back
and lets others
take the lead on this.